New execution model (beta) (#4083)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/guides/executor.mdx

---
title: Executor primitive (beta)
description: Executor is a lower-level primitive that provides more flexibility when customizing your error mitigation workflow.

---

# Executor primitive (beta)

<Admonition type="note" title="Beta release">

> The Executor primitive is currently in beta and might not be stable. You are invited to test it and provide feedback. (((how?)))

Reviewer: It's an open beta, so anyone can access it. They just need to install the preview branch.

Reviewer: ah sorry I misunderstood this. I thought it's asking how do they get invited 😄. 

The best way to provide feedback is probably to open issues in samplomatic or qiskit-ibm-runtime repo.

</Admonition>

> The Executor primitive is designed for quantum information scientists to run utility-scale experiments. Executor provides finer control over advanced techniques by shifting the generation of circuit variants to the server side, saving network costs and making the process explicit and customizable. With Executor, users can fine-tune error mitigation and other techniques to find the right balance of speed and quality in their utility-scale workloads.

Author: ```suggestion
The Executor primitive and its supporting tools are designed for quantum information scientists to run utility-scale experiments that require more control and flexibility. Executor provides the ingredients to capture design intents on the client side, and shifts the costly generation of circuit variants to the server side, so that you can fine-tune error mitigation and other techniques without sacrificing performance. Executor's clear, composable model for execution workflows makes it easier to experiment with new techniques, reproduce results, and share methods.
```

> The Executor primitive benefits users who want to improve the reliability of computations on noisy quantum hardware, and are interested in capabilities such as noise learning, twirling, and expectation value calculations. With Executor, users will gain a clearer and more composable model for execution workflows, making it easier to experiment with new techniques, reproduce results, and share methods.

Reviewer: What does "the reliability of computations on noisy quantum hardware" mean? 

Regardless, I think the previous paragraph covers the benefit of using Executor. Perhaps this one can be simplified to 

> In this initial release, Executor support focuses mostly on Pauli-twirling, noise model learning and injection, and basis changes. More support will continue to be rolled out in the near future.

</Admonition>

The Executor primitive and its supporting tools are designed for quantum information scientists to run utility-scale experiments that require more control and flexibility. Executor provides the ingredients to capture design intents on the client side, and shifts the costly generation of circuit variants to the server side, so that you can fine-tune error mitigation and other techniques without sacrificing performance. Executor's clear, composable model for execution workflows makes it easier to experiment with new techniques, reproduce results, and share methods.

In this initial release, Executor support focuses mostly on Pauli twirling, noise model learning and injection, and basis changes. Other support capabilities will be added gradually over time.

## Samplomatic

The Executor primitive works in the context of the [Samplomatic](https://github.com/Qiskit/samplomatic/) package, which is a library that supports customized sampling randomizations.

> Samplomatic uses box instructions to reason about collections of circuit operations that should be treated as having a stable noise context, and uses annotations on boxes to allow users to declare and configure intent. Every box is a scope that owns a set of qubits, operations that act on those qubits, and a list of annotations. 

Reviewer: > Samplomatic uses box instructions

We should link to the [box API](https://quantum.cloud.ibm.com/docs/en/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit#box). And I think it's more accurate to call it a "construct" rather than an instruction.

> Samplomatic annotations specify *directives* and *dressings*. Directives specify what to do with the box (for example, twirl the box). Dressings are groups of parameterized gates to add to the left or right side of the box (for example, a layer of single-qubit gates).

Reviewer: Similarly, I don't think we need this paragraph, since it doesn't provide much value without going into more details - e.g. how do you specify directives, what do the dressings look like, etc
